Virtual Palaces II. Virtual Palaces Part II: Lost Palaces and their Afterlife. Virtual Reconstruction between Science 
and Media Proceedings of the European Science Foundation Research Networking Programme "PALATIUM" ‐ 
Meeting at Munich, 13‐15 April 2012. ISBN 978‐94‐6018‐538‐0PALATIUM 

Back to the Future 

Visualizing the Planning and Building of the Dresden 
Zwinger 

Peter	Heinrich	Jahn	PhD	(art	and	architectural	historian,	lecturer,	Institut	
für	Kunst‐	und	Musikwissenschft,	Technische	Universität	Dresden,	
Germany)	

Markus	Wacker	PhD	(prof.	of	computer	science,	computer	science/	
mathematics	faculty,	Hochschule	für	Wirtschaft	und	Technik	Dresden,	
Germany)	

Dirk	Welich	PhD	(art	historian,	deputy	head	of	museum	department,	
Staatliche	Schlösser,	Burgen	und	Gärten	Sachsen	gGmbH,	Dresden,	
Germany)	

 

In this article we1 present a long term project on the Dresden Zwinger (fig. 1, 2, 5, 6) using techniques 
that  have  been  and  still  are  discussed  very  controversially  –  the  production  of  imagery  of 
architecture with the possibilities of the computer. Since the very first thoughts on this topic, the 
technical  requirements,  possibilities  and  ideas  about  what  can  be  achieved  with  the  help  of 
computer  technique  have  changed  dramatically.  The  question,  for  which  application  area  the 
computer  could  be  necessary,  is  still  important  today.  With  this  project  we  want  to  present  our 
approach in using computer technique for the virtual three‐dimensional reconstruction of the history 
of the Dresden Zwinger. 

Fig. 1: View of the Dresden Zwinger, especially its buildings at the rear of the former fortification wall. 

 

© University of Leuven, Institute of XXXXXXX and Authors 
ISBN xxx‐xxxxxxxx‐xx‐x 

 

1 

 

Fig. 2: Arcaded gallery of the Dresden Zwinger along the fortification wall and moat, centered by a gateway tower (so‐called 

Kronentor). 

Initiated in 2007 for museum‐didactical purposes by the Saxon Administration of State‐owned 
Castles and Gardens (Staatliche Schlösser, Burgen und Gärten Sachsen gGmbH) the project led to a 
cooperation with the Dresden University of Applied Sciences (HTW – Hochschule für Wirtschaft und 
Technik) which reflects the name ‘zwingerteam‘ in terms of a catch‐word. The basic intention of this 
project  is  the  mediation  of  the  building  development  and  the  planning  history  of  the  Dresden 
Zwinger for the use in a permanent exhibition. That means, the easily recognizable form of the virtual 
three‐dimensional  representation  of  complex  ranged  construction  activities  will  be  used  for  the 
teaching  of  architectural  knowledge  methodically  and  didactically,  as  a  help  for  the  visitors  to 
manage the mental transfer from the historic two‐dimensional sources into the three‐dimensional 
space.  For  giving  an  understandable  survey  the  complex  and  long  during  building  and  planning 
development of the Zwinger has to be dispersed in a few well‐selected phases, our so‐called time‐
cuts. So, the situation is not an art‐historical study of the architecture of the Dresden Zwinger, but a 
practical application with the following main objectives:
to explain the construction development in its temporal sequence, 

to give an idea of selected complex range planning designs, 

to force the understanding of the Baroque system architecture as well as 

to force the sense for architectural proportions, façade elements and spatial relationships. 

 

Introduction 

The Dresden Zwinger is the most famous Baroque building in the city with a diverse history and of 
art‐historical  importance.  It  started  in  1709  under  the  reign  of  Augustus  the  Strong  (at  that  time 
prince elector of Saxony and king of Poland) as an orangery laid out on one of the city’s fortification 
walls at the rear of the Residential Castle (fig. 3),2 and was extended due to the absolutist need for 

2 

 

representation  facilities  already  since  1711  (a  planning  example  in  fig.  4).  In  1728  construction 
activities waned. From that year onwards the Zwinger buildings, meanwhile enclosing a courtyard at 
three sides, were used as a museum for the royal collections. Finally, in the midst of the nineteenth 
century, the gap on the north side was closed with the public picture gallery designed by Gottfried 
Semper (fig. 5, 6). In the mere consideration of that long term building development an extensive 
project grew out of an initially small task with increasing knowledge of the sources since 2007, such 
that in the end fourteen construction and planning phases of the Dresden Zwinger (as listed below in 
fig.  12)  were  virtually  reconstructed  respectively  simulated  in  detail  and  fitted  into  a  schematic 
topographic model of the closer surroundings (examples in fig. 7 and 10). 

Fig. 3: Sketch by August the Strong of an orangery laid out at the rear of the fortification wall beneath the residential castle 

of Dresden (so‐called Zwinger area), in the project used as main source for time‐cut no. 1. 

 

Fig. 4: Bird`s‐eye view of an unexecuted Zwinger extension designed by Pöppelmann 1712–13 (original lost since 1945), in 

the project used as main source for time‐cut no. 3. 

 

 

3 

Fig. 5: Arial view of the Dresden Zwinger (at the right the court church and the residential castle with the adjoined 

Taschenberg Palace is situated, above, between the Zwinger courtyard and the river Elbe, the 2nd court theatre, today 

known as ‘Semper‐Oper’). 

 

Fig. 6: Ground plan of the Dresden Zwinger (on the left the initial Ω‐shaped buildings at the rear of the fortification wall, on 
the right the mirrored buildings nearby the residential castle and the city, at the bottom the gallery aisle centered by the 

crowned gate and at the top the picture museum added in the 19th century). 

 

 

 

4 

Focus of the project 

During a long processing time of more than five years the editing focus of the project has shifted 
considerably from the pure construction history towards favouring the ideal type of design planning. 
In these historic plans the Zwinger courtyard was not the sole subject of the draft, but rather part of 
a court complex always connected with the residential castle, where it took the secondary role of an 
integrated  garden  (examples  in  fig.  4,  9).  The  expansion  of  such  designs  would  range  far  into  the 
contemporary urban space and overlap them inevitably. Their mediation by models gives the chance 
that the future visitor can find out, to where the planned buildings locate, when they would be built. 
He is able to get wind of dimensions an idea through his own physical experiences (fig. 7, 10). 

 

Fig. 7: Virtual model of the building development 1712–18 (time‐cut no. 4; built structures in sandstone colour, a projected 
wing, of which only the foundation could be laid, in white), fitted into a schematic virtual model of the historic surrounding 

area. 

In  fact,  this  link  between  the  built  architecture  of  the  Zwinger,  its  surroundings,  and  the 
historic unexecuted designs is also an added value for architectural research – namely, a verifying 
building  simulation  of  unexecuted  historic  designs  by  combination  with  reconstructed  building 
phases.  Moreover,  a  review  of  the  pure  construction  history  of  the  Dresden  Zwinger  seems  quite 
fragmentary  considering  the  fact  that  many  building  activities  must  be  regarded  as  a  partial 
execution  of  more  extensive  designs.  Since  our  efforts  in  preparing  the  three‐dimensional 
reconstructions and simulations of buildings had evidenced that within the historic source material 
discrepancies,  especially  between  ground  plan  and  elevation,  are  more  the  rule  than  exception,  a 
special problem posed the critical harmonisation of differing sources. A comparable problem to solve 
was the question how gaps of documentation could be filled in a convincing way. The experience 
made in the course of the modelling often led to a deeper understanding of a draft, and in the end to 
a  critical  and  revising  historical  reflection  on  its  structure,  logic,  quality  and  the  possibility  of 
realization. All these issues are of interest for the art‐historical view on the Dresden Zwinger. 

To present the project results within an exhibition we have been taken in consideration the 
form  of  a  teaching  video.  The  film  will  consist  of  the  historical  sources  combined  with  the 

 

5 

reconstruction  of  a  fictional  walk  through  the  different  states  of  the  Zwinger  building  including 
adjacent areas of the town.3 

Fig. 8: Virtual model of Pöppelmann’s design for the Dresden Zwinger 1722 (time‐cut no. 8) in card board optic with part of 

the present Zwinger buildings and the residential castle in textured optic. 

 

The sources 

 

In  order  to  achieve  for  the  virtual  models  a  valuable  source  library,  our  research  consisted  in 
assembling  all  visual  source  material  which  can  give  some  evidence  of  the  building  and  planning 
history  of  the  Zwinger  area.  This  material  is  very  heterogeneously  composed  of  plans,  elevations, 
perspective views, and photographs (examples in fig. 9 and 12). To make all of it accessible for our 
project, the way of research led via the illustrations in relevant modern book publications into the 
archives and collections in Dresden which preserve the majority of the originals.4 

The next step was a revision of the common opinions about the building and planning history 
of the Zwinger. As the most important result of this effort can be regarded a new reconstruction of 
Matthäus Daniel Pöppelmann’s last vast garden project which has been only partially published in 
the  so‐called  Zwingerstichwerk,  Pöppelmann’s  own  copperplate‐publication  of  his  architectural 
inventions (fig. 9, 10).5 

In the end, fourteen so‐called time‐cuts were distilled from the visual sources (fig. 11, 12). 
They  represent  important  building  phases  or  design  states.  Our  selection  criteria  have  been  the 
following: Primarily, the main building phases should be represented. According to that five time‐cuts 
(nos. 2, 4, 7, 12 and 14) are dedicated to the real building development of the area. From the more 
than 34 known projects, which had remained unexecuted, we subjectively selected the eight most 
attractive  and  precious  ones  with  respect  to  their  urbanistic  importance  as  well  as  their 
impressiveness.  For  pragmatic  reasons  we  decided  to  model  only  such  planning  phases  which  are 

 

6 

documented sufficiently by ground plans and elevations or which could be reconstructed without any 
further problems (discussion below). We also decided to represent all architects who were involved 
in the planning of the Zwinger area, beginning with Pöppelmann and ending with Gottfried Semper 
including Zacharias Longuelune, Jean De Bodt and Gaetano Chiaveri. 

At  last,  the  collected  visual  sources  for  the  chosen  fourteen  time‐cuts  were  digitized, 
uploaded  and  organized  into  a  database  to  which  the  whole  team  had  online  access  (fig.  13; 
http://www2.htw‐dresden.de/~zwinger/). 

Fig. 9: Compiled sources for Pöppelmann’s vast garden project of 1716–18 (time‐cut no. 5). 

 

 

7 

 

Fig. 10: Virtual model of time‐cut no. 5 (cf. fig. 9) fitted into an adequate schematic 3D‐model of the surroundings. 

Fig. 11: Overview of the chosen 14‐time‐cuts mirroring the development of the Dresden Zwinger, each represented by one 

 

characteristic source. 

 

1. Prince elector August the Strong 1709–10: sketched first idea (project) 
Matthäus Daniel Pöppelmann: 

2.  1711–13: Orangery at the back side of the fortification wall (building phase) 
3.  1712–13: Extension of the orangery with garden and festivity areas (project) 
4.  1713–18: Extension of the orangery with a central pavilion (‘Wallpavillon’) and a 

towered gateway (‘Kronentor’) between galleries (building phase) 

5.  1716: Extension of the orangery with a water theatre and a enclosed garden 

(project) 

6.  1716–18: Integration of the orangery in a vast new residential castle (project) 
7.  1719: Mirroring of the orangery for obtaining a festivity yard and closing of the 

latter with an ephemeral stand (building phase; the last main one of the Baroque 
era) 

8.  1722: Extension of the festivity yard with museum halls and a central pavilion 

(project) 

Followers of Pöppelmann: 

 

8 

9. Zacharias Longuelune 1728: Extension of the Zwinger courtyard with a new residential 

castle (project) 

10. Jean De  Bodt 1736–37: Extension  of the Zwinger courtyard  with a new residential 

castle (project) 

11.  Gaetano  Chiaveri  1746–47:  Extension  of  the  Zwinger  courtyard  with  a  new 

residential castle (project) 

12. Anonymus before 1800: Provisory closing of the Zwinger courtyard with an arcaded 
wall (building phase; the wall was substituted for a new one and finally since 1847 for 
the picture gallery) 

19th century: Gottfried Semper: 

13.    1842:  Extension  of  the  Baroque  Zwinger  courtyard  into  a  forum  with  picture 

gallery and court theatre (project) 

14.    1847–69:  Closing  of  the  Baroque  Zwinger  courtyard  with  a  picture  gallery  in 
addition  of  the  already  erected  court  theatre  (building  phase;  the  theatre  was 
destroyed 1869 by fire) 

Fig. 12: List of the 14 chosen time‐cuts mirroring the development of the Dresden Zwinger with date and main architect. 

Fig. 13: Web‐based database and project page at http://www2.htw‐dresden.de/~zwinger/. 

 

9 

 

 

 

Modelling 

In order to produce the virtual models in the computer, students of the HTW Dresden were recruited 
from  the  Media  Computer  Science  degree  program.  In  total  27  students  have  participated  in  the 
project  to  model  the  different  time‐cuts.6  We  started  with  the  modelling  tool  3D  Studio  Max  7, 
upgraded  almost  every  year  to  a  new  version  (fig.  14)  which  imposed  a  considerable  amount  of 
conversion work (actual version: 3D Studio Max 2014). Moreover we also integrated the outstanding 
expertise of some members of the group with other modelling tools like Cinema 4D and Blender (cf. 
fig. 18 right) for which we had to find an exchange format and also an exchange workflow (at the end 
the file format ‘obj’ and adaption by hand worked best). Moreover the changing and replacement of 
team members (we called the ‘student generations’) were a big issue in our team which was tackled 
by intensive meeting and integration phases. 

 

Fig. 14: Virtual model of time‐cut no. 6 uploaded in the modelling software Autodesk 3D Studio Max 9. 

Regarding the creation of the models, an immense amount of hand work has to be done to 
achieve the present state of each model accompanied by intensive inspection and revision meetings 
(discussed below). Nevertheless some basic key modelling steps are presented next in order to give 
an idea of the modelling work. Here we concentrate on two main techniques: the box modelling and 
the spline modelling. Both start with orthogonal projected representations of the desired building 
such as the ground and elevation plan. But before that, as preparation, the information content of 
the compiled sources had to be sorted for assigning the elevations to a ground plan. Special diagrams 
of those correlations had been arranged for each time‐cut to give the modellers a kind of guide line. 
The  one  shown  in  figure  15,  prepared  for  modelling  time‐cut  no.  11,  i.e.  the  castle  designed  by 
Gaetano Chiaveri, exemplifies in another aspect also a sufficient providing with source material. The 
dealing of more problematic cases for the reconstruction, in which sources has been lacking, will be 
discussed below. 

10 

 

 

Fig. 15: Diagram of the correlating source material (ground plan and elevations) provided for the modeller of time‐cut 

no. 11, i.e. Chiaveri’s castle project of 1746–47, and corresponding virtual model. 

Before  explaining  the  two  modelling  techniques, 

it  must  be  pointed  out  that  the 
‘zwingerteam’  project  focuses  only  on  the  cubic  structure  and  the  façades  of  the  buildings,  while 
their  internal  structure  is  not  modelled.7  The  formal  execution  of  architectonic  elements  varies 
depending on the specific quality and availability of the source material between the different time‐
cuts. Within a time‐cut, however, a homogeneous level of detail has been pursued. The gradation of 
abstraction  results  from  a  steady  and  regular  simplification  of  forms.  In  the  course  of  abstraction 
considerable attention is paid to the compliance with the architectonic system. 

The box modelling technique (fig. 16) starts with very simple geometry such as a box for main 
buildings or cylinders for pillars. They are adapted in shape to the right dimensions and placed at the 
right position in the model (Fehler! Verweisquelle konnte nicht gefunden werden.fig. 16 left). By 
this approach a rough outline of the desired object is quickly achieved and the cubature becomes 
visible. Afterwards a very time consuming process of subdivision and adaptation of the representing 
mesh (i.e. its vertices) follows to approach the model to details of the architecture (fig. 16Fehler! 
Verweisquelle  konnte  nicht  gefunden  werden.  right).  Often  predefined  tools  and  modifiers  (e.g. 
local shrinking, bending) can be used but in the end extensive work by hand is inevitable to achieve 
even finest details. 

 

11 

Fig. 16: Box modelling (left) and virtual model over the ground plan and in front of an elevation plan (right), exemplified by 

time‐cut no. 11, i.e. Chiaveri’s castle project of 1746–47. 

The  spline  modelling  technique  (fig.  17)  consists  of  drawing  lines  (e.g.  splines)  for  the 
contours of the building in some main directions on the plans. This process ends up with a line cage 
which can then be transformed into a mesh which is then processed as described above to model the 
details. 

 

Fig. 17: Phases of the spline modelling technique exemplified by a cupola design taken out from the source material for 

time‐cut no. 9 (cf. above fig. 11, no. 9). 

 

 

Presenting mode of the models 

The inhomogeneous source material also required a longer readjustment process in regard to visuals 
because the aesthetic appearance of the reconstruction directly affects its understanding in terms of 
the intended knowledge transfer. On the one hand, we would like to show the current state of the 
Zwinger and its construction phases. On the other hand, we want to present unexecuted designs as 
well  as  building  elements  of  a  certain  time  period  which  do  not  exist  anymore.  For  the 
representation of the existing building substance a richly‐detailed, polygonal model is being used in 
order to create an impression of the present state as authentic as possible (fig. 18 right, 19). 

 

12 

 

Fig. 18: Inner staircase of the western central pavilion (so‐called Wallpavillon) of the Dresden Zwinger. Left: photograph of 

the original building. Right: rendering of a textured polygon model. 

Regarding the representation of designs, the general aim is to interpret the historical image 

sources as little as possible. It was therefore an attempt to transfer the source directly to the raw 
cubature of a building (fig. 8). However, the result distorts the visitor's spatial understanding since 
the components are extracted from the original context of the source image. Ultimately, the decision 
for the graphic realization was made for an architectonic model made out of cardboard which is the 
generally known type (see for example the model in fig. 15). Due to this display mode all levels of 
abstraction can be represented easily, the status of the modelling seems clear and the distinction or 
separation from the existing Zwinger buildings is obvious (fig. 8, 10; cf. also as variant fig. 19). 

Fig. 19: Virtual model of the actual Dresden Zwinger (time‐cut no. 14) contrasting the Baroque buildings with the added 

picture gallery of the 19th century by using textured and cardboard appearance. 

If  sources  for  a  complete  reconstruction  are  missing,  the  gap  will  either  be  bridged  by 
deducing  analogies  from  the  current  architectonic  system  (as  discussed  below)  or  by  closing  it 
neutrally, in form of either naked cubature (fig. 20) or plastically modelled ground plan in the sense 
of  foundation  runs  (fig.  21).8  This  approach  guarantees  that  the  layout  of  every  building  is 
represented in the model, even if there are no indications of any detail. 

 

 

13 

Fig. 20: Part of the virtual model of time‐cut no. 5 with neutrally closed structure in form of naked cubatures (polygonal 

pavilion with projections in cross‐form located on the wall terrace along the riverside; its form can be taken solely from the 

ground plan of the project; cf. fig. 9). 

 

 

Fig. 21: Detail of the ground plan source for time‐cut no. 6 and related virtual model. Because of the lack of any further 
information the area (towered water theatre of the Zwinger garden with an aviary at the rear and adjacent rounded 

pavilions) is modelled neutrally in form of a plastic ground plan. 

A further modelling step consists in the integration of the Zwinger buildings and projects into 
topographic models of the surroundings to establish correlations with the urban space. The layout of 
the surrounding buildings has to be conformable to the historic topographic situation of each time‐
cut. Their models are reduced to a neutral cubic volume to contrast with the Zwinger architecture, 
but accented with a few significant architectonic details for easier identification (see above fig. 7, 10). 

 

Control of the models 

One very time consuming and intensive task in the project was the control and revision of the models 
by comparison with the sources .Monthly meetings with the modellers in Dresden at the HTW made 
it possible to discuss the  development of the models and their exactness intensively. Protocols of 
each session, which have been archived internally, supported the control work and will give future 
possibility  to  reconstruct  the  genesis  of  every  modelled  time‐cut.9  Our  primary  media  of 
communication were renderings, i.e. computer generated photo shots of the models from different 
perspectives or views. For preparing such a meeting the actual renderings were also uploaded into 
the  online‐database  (folder  ‘Modelle’  above  in  fig.  13).  During  the  control  sessions  double 

14 

 

projections  of  the  rendered  model  and  the  related  source  on  the  wall  gave  the  possibility  of 
comparison (fig. 22). A whiteboard was used for explaining difficult structural problems by drawing 
(fig. 23); even sometimes we projected the rendering of the model on this whiteboard so that we 
could  draw  on  it  to  augment  or  comment  the  projection  (fig.  24).  Between  the  meetings  some 
modellers also communicated via e‐mail with the heads of the project to solve problems as soon as 
possible. 

Fig. 22: Double projection of a rendered virtual model (left) and the related source (right), exemplified by Pöppelmann’s 
castle project of time‐cut no. 6 (in detail the complex curved and structured centre pavilion of the main cour d’honneur). 

Both images show the building in a mostly correlating view. 

 

Fig. 23: Whiteboard in the conference room at HTW Dresden, used for drawn explanations of modelling problems (the 

violet stripe above derives from the projection light of the video beamer). 

 

 

15 

 

Fig. 24: Projection of a rendered virtual model (detail of time‐cut no. 13, i.e. garden façade of the proposed picture gallery) 

on the whiteboard seen in fig. 23 for the possibility of drawing corrections over the model. 

In some cases typological references were used to explain an insufficiently documented part 
of a time‐cut. A good example gives time‐cut no. 3: The bird’s‐eye view as the main source is lost 
since World War II and only documented by an archive photograph in black‐and‐white (see above fig. 
4), with the effect that the three rounded pavilions which can be seen in its background are hardly 
recognizable.  To  give  the  modeller  a  better  imagination  of  the  buildings  we  used  a  comparable 
pavilion which is located in the Hermitage Garden of Bayreuth (fig. 25). 

Fig. 25: Insufficiently documented pavilion of time‐cut no. 3 (left, cf. fig. 4), being substituted by the Temple of the Sun in 

the Hermitage Garden of Bayreuth (middle) as pattern for the virtual model (right). 

Only in the last phase of the project the actual models were directly controlled and corrected 
together with the  modeller in the modelling software (see above fig. 14).  For handling  the at last 

 

 

16 

immense  data  masses  in  real  time  we  had  to  use  the  high  performance  computer  of  the  HTW’s 
motion‐capture‐system. 

 

Work and problems with the sources 

As mentioned above, the visual sources for each time‐cut consist of different media types and also of 
different quality. High  definition scans  of original drawings and  blurry scans from black and white 
book illustrations mark the two extremes of quality with which the modellers were confronted. We 
normally used book illustrations if either the originals are lost since World War II10 or an archive has 
not been able to deliver digital images of the originals. Nevertheless, book illustrations bear some 
general advantages compared to the reproduced originals: they are not only easier to access but also 
easier to handle because of comparatively small dimensions, and often free of any distortions. In the 
recourse to book illustrations customary scan techniques can be used in most cases unscrupulously 
und very quickly because problems of conservation connected with the originals are avoided. In fact, 
decisions  whether  book  illustrations  or  originals  should  be  digitized  sometimes  had  been  taken 
pragmatically  in  consideration  of  the  respective  source  situation,  efficiency  and  the  modellers’ 
special needs for detailed information. Nevertheless, the preparation of the source material was led 
by the general wish to make it as comfortable as possible for the modellers. 

An  extreme  example  exhibits  time‐cut  no.  9:  This  impressive  virtual  model  of  a  castle 
designed by  Zacharias Longuelune for the area between the Zwinger  courtyard and  the river Elbe 
(fig. 27; for the location see above fig. 5) is based on some scanned book illustrations in black and 
white of small size and poor quality (fig. 26). In this case, the original plan drawings are not lost but of 
large size with the effect that the preserving archives have had no practicable possibility to digitize it 
without any distortions.11 So, unfortunately, we had to recourse on the available book illustrations 
published  in  the  early  1950ies.  The  advantage  of  their  use  lied  in  the  lack  of  distortions,  the 
disadvantage in the  deficiency of clearness in regard to details.  But in the end the latter problem 
could be compensated by digital photographs of representative details taken directly of the originals. 

Fig. 26: Book illustrations of Baroque plan drawings, edited in a quarto volume, taken as source for time‐cut no. 9. 

 

17 

 

Fig. 27: Virtual model of Zacharias Longuelune’s castle project of 1728 (time‐cut no. 9). 

 

 

Fig. 28: Reconstruction in Photoshop of a lacking elevation for time‐cut no. 9, done by using elements of the elevations 
depicted in fig. 24. For the virtual model generated on basis of the reconstructed elevation see fig. 27 in the foreground. 

The most striking problems during the definition of time‐cuts regarding unexecuted projects 
were  either  the  partial  lack  of  visual  sources  or  the  discrepancy  of  measured  ground  plans  and 
elevations – or both. For this reason reconstructions have seemed to be indispensable in order to 
avoid any larger gaps which could the recipient of the virtual models irritate or even disillusion the 
recipient  of  the  virtual  model.  To  fill  those  gaps  in  a  believable  way  it  is  necessary  to  base  the 
reconstruction on different critical principles. One of them is the deduction from the documented 
parts of the building project itself. In the case of the just mentioned time‐cut no. 9, for example, one 
front elevation is lacking, namely that of the gallery wing located at the rear of the castle along the 
riverside.  The  reconstruction  could  be  deduced  on  the  one  hand  from  the  existing  ground  plan 
together  with  the  sections  of  this  building  wing  and  on  the  other  hand  from  the  homogenous 
architectonic system which allowed the borrowing of elements from the documented façades. The 
strict orthogonal projection of the existing plans gave the possibility to produce easily an elevation as 
instruction  tool  for  the  modeller,  because  the  usable  façade  elements  could  be  brought  in  a  new 
order with the help of Photoshop software (fig. 28). While this comfortable method of reconstruction 
was the preferred one, in the worst case, if orthogonal projected plans have been completely lacking, 

 

18 

elevations or ground plans had to be reconstructed in form of schematic drawings (with the problem 
that  none  of  the  leading  team  members  is  a  professional  draughtsman)  if,  in  the  worst  case, 
orthogonal  projected  plans  have  been  completely  lacking.  For  this  issue  the  following  problem  of 
reconstruction will give an example: 

A  missing  ground  plan  is  of  no  further  problem  if  one  has  to  deal  with  cubic  architecture. 
However,  it  turned  out  to  be  a  big  one  for  the  modellers  if  the  buildings  show  curvatures  and 
complex  systems  of  columns,  pilasters,  or  lesenes  since  in  orthogonal  projected  elevations  these 
aspects are not sufficiently readable. As an example for this problem we can take one of the tower 
buildings of time‐cut no. 5: The situation plan shows schematic and inaccurate ground plans for two 
gateway  towers  and  one  fountain  tower  (see  above  fig.  9).  Two  final  planning  states  of  these 
buildings had been published in elevations by Pöppelmann in his own copperplate edition about the 
Zwinger.12  Unfortunately,  their  basement  level  differs  in  its  form  so  much  from  the  situation  plan 
that the reconstruction could not be limited to the buildings itself but also had to include the course 
of the connecting colonnades. A schematically drawn ground plan was necessary to instruct precisely 
the modeller (fig. 29). 

 

Fig. 29: From elevation via a sketched reconstruction of the ground plan to the virtual model, exemplified by a gateway 

tower of time‐cut no. 5 (cf. above fig. 9). 

The lack of a ground plan can also lead to great difficulties if as elevation only a perspective 
view of a project has survived like in time‐cut no. 3 (see above fig. 4). In this case an existing ground 
plan correlates only partially with the bird’s‐eye view taken as the main source for the virtual model 
(fig. 30). Further complication causes that the area of inadequateness in the ground plan is solely 
depicted at a half in the elevation source: One can recognize there a tilt‐yard flanked by one half of 
an edifice serving for festivities. The gap, consisting first of all in a second yard nearby the riverside, 
was  closed  by  repeating  some  recognizable  elements  from  that  tilt‐yard  like  the  monumental 
gateway,  outside  staircase  and  retaining  wall,  while  the  building  was  completed  by  mirroring  the 
depicted half. Common building logic gave evidence for the addition of a huge symmetrical staircase 
hall at the rear of the edifice; the latter naturally conform to the architectonic system of the front 
façade. Finally the proportions of all the unexecuted buildings had to be found for lack of measured 
elevations in adjustment with the existing Zwinger architecture. 

 

19 

 

Fig. 30: Confrontation of sources (bird’s‐eye view of fig. 4 and relatable ground plan) and virtual model for time‐cut no. 3. 
The red frames mark a zone of insufficient and inconsistent documentation which had to be modelled partially as a free 

interpretation but consistently to the architectural system depicted in the elevation source. 

Comparable  to  the  so  far  exemplified  deductive  methods  of  critical  reconstruction  is  the 
borrowing of forms from typologically related buildings or designs of the same architect. This was 
done, for example, in time‐cut no. 13 which represents Gottfried Semper’s grand forum project. The 
elevation of the proposed museum building is documented only by a perspective visualization of the 
project which shows the building on the left with its main façade of the garden side in an extremely 
shortened view in which all details are unrecognizably upset (fig. 31). And while nothing of the other 
main façade on the town side can be seen, only one narrow side of the building is depicted frontally. 
So in this case, both main façades including the monumental staircase projection on the town side 
had to be reconstructed. As measured source material only a ground plan published by Semper exists 
which  could  give  some  orientation.13  Patterns  usable  for  the  reconstruction  had  been  fortunately 
found in the context of Semper’s alternative designs for the Zwinger area. So, the staircase projection 
of the town façade could be deduced mostly without any alterations from a preparatory sketch for 
the museum project which proposes for a first time the finally chosen building site (fig. 32). More 
difficult the ground storey of the façades was to reconstruct because in the source, at this zone one 
can only recognize the shadows of some cornices, the arcades and above them some obscure dark 
spots which have been interpreted as medallions. All these motifs are assembled again at the outer 
main  façade  of  Semper’s  executed  museum  building  but  there  in  a  varied  combination.  As  often 
done, the modeller undertook their recombination by some trial‐and‐error‐attempts and supported 
by a sketched elevation drawing (fig. 33). 

 

20 

Fig. 31: Details of the main elevation source for time‐cut no. 13 (cf. above fig. 11, no. 13), showing in extreme perspective 

distortion Gottfried Semper’s proposal for a picture gallery which is laid out in front of the residential castle. 

 

Fig. 32: Sketched design of Gottfried Semper for a picture gallery used as pattern for the virtual reconstruction of an 

insufficiently documented alternative design (time‐cut no. 13; cf. fig. 31), namely for the staircase projection at the town 

side. 

 

 

Fig. 33: Reconstruction of the ground storey of Gottfried Semper’s design for a picture gallery in front of the residential 
castle (time‐cut no. 13; cf. fig. 31) by borrowing motifs (medallions, cornices, pillar arcades) from the outer façade of the 

executed building. 

 

21 

A further used deductive principle of critical reconstruction, the deduction of forms and structures 
from typologically and stylistically related buildings, was already mentioned above in the case of the 
octagonal pavilions of time‐cut no. 3 which are documented only by an unclear perspective view of 
small size (see above fig. 25). 

Another guideline of critical reconstruction was based on the baroque architectural principle 
of symmetry. This principle proved to be very successful in the reconstruction of time‐cut no. 6 which 
represents Pöppelmann’s so‐called Grand Castle Project which reduces the Zwinger courtyard to a 
secret garden of a gigantic residential area with three cour d’honneurs. From this ambitious project 
we  only  have  the  situation  plan  (fig.  34)  and  an  impressive  perspective  view  of  the  main  cour 
d’honneur (fig. 35). The remaining two cour d’honneurs on the rear can be completed in most parts 
by mirroring one side wing of the depicted corps de logis, first to the left side and from there inside 
the court, then along the rear front to the right side, afterwards inside the right court  and finally 
along both outer side façades as shown in the diagram of fig. 34. In addition, the position of colossal 
columns  could  be  read  out  of  the  situation  plan  by  comparison  of  diameters  because  in  the 
perspective view some of those colossal columns are depicted and therefore locatable. The result of 
this reconstruction attempt is an impressive virtual model which allows experiencing plastically the 
vast dimensions of an excessive Baroque building project (fig. 36). 

Fig. 34: Situation plan of Pöppelmann’s Grand Castle Project 1716–18 (time‐cut no. 6). The yellow frame marks the area 
depicted in fig. 35. Red arrows together with red lines as symmetry axes mark the ten mirroring steps which had been 

necessary to reconstruct virtually the complete building cubature of the castle. 

 

 

22 

Fig. 35: Perspective view in the main cour d’honneur of Pöppelmann’s Grand Castle Project 1716–18, being the one and 

only elevation source for time‐cut no. 6. 

 

 

Fig. 36: Virtual model of Pöppelmann’s Grand Castle Project 1716–18 (time‐cut no. 6). 

23 

 

 

Scientific results 

The virtual reconstruction of the Dresden Zwinger developed during the described project gives us a 
deeper  analytic  insight  into  the  historic  planning  process  and  its  inherent  problems.  For  example, 
from  rectifying  the  perspective  view  of  time‐cut  number  6  we  were  able  to  learn  how  much  the 
historic media of architectural visualization can deceive us: If you count the axes strictly according to 
the ground plan, the virtual model turns out that some parts of the side facades show a somewhat 
strange disproportion while they do not appear so in the perspective distorted view (fig. 37). 

 

Fig. 37: Perspective distorted detail in the elevation source for time‐cut no. 6 (cf. fig. 35) and its rectifying by the virtual 

model. The axes of the architecture appear slender in the historic depiction but broad and portly in the model. 

Taking into consideration the many discrepancies between ground plans and elevations we 
have to ask if this is the result of a fragmentary conservation or of a drafting process which continues 
during  the  drawing  process.  In  our  opinion  it  is  plausible  that,  while  an  elevation  plan  was  being 
drawn, alterations to an already existing ground plan could be invented by the architect and directly 
integrated  into  the  new  elevation  drawing.  In  fact,  before  the  acceptance  of  a  project  it  was  not 
really necessary that all the plans made for it correspond to each other since discrepancies could be 
taken in a positive sense as alternative proposals. A need for coordination was only given if the plans 
would have had to fulfil a function on an actual construction site. The refusing of a draft must have 
let seem such coordination work as an additional and in the end senseless toil, with the effect that 
partially not correlating plans could be archived. 

Very  illuminating  was  the  possibility  to  combine  the  castle  projects  of  Pöppelmann’s 
successors with the Zwinger courtyard erected by him. In the eighteenth century, such a combination 
was obviously mostly done in two‐dimensional situation plans but only seldomly in elevations. One 
fine example is the central polygonal pavilion of Zacharias Longuelune’s castle project (time‐cut no. 
9) which was supposed to become the counterpart  of Pöppelmann’s crowned gateway tower (so‐
called  Kronentor;  see  above  fig.  2).  As  an  isolated  form  in  the  elevation  plan  the  pavilion  looks 
precious  and  delicate  (see  above  fig.  26,  middle  column).  In  combination  with  Pöppelmann’s 
architecture, however, it takes on a monstrous aspect. The Zwinger courtyard almost appears like the 
front garden of a somewhat oversized castle (fig. 36, cf. also fig. 27). 

 

24 

Fig. 38: Virtual model of Zacharias Longuelune’s castle project 1728 (time‐cut no. 9) in addition to the already existing 

Zwinger courtyard. 

 

 

Conclusion 

The  ‘zwingerteam’  project,  initiated  by  the  Saxon  Administration  of  State‐owned  Castles  and 
Gardens,  had  begun  with  a  certain  museum‐didactic  aim:  the  building  development  and  planning 
history  of  the  Dresden  Zwinger  should  be  modelled  virtually  for  instructing  future  visitors  of  that 
famous Baroque building. But in the course of project progress it has achieved in the end also some 
scientific  results  of  diverse  value.  As  primary  output  fourteen  more  or  less  complex  virtual  three‐
dimensional models of construction and planning phases (so‐called time‐cuts) have been produced 
including  a  richly‐detailed  one  of  the  existing  buildings  as  well  as  fourteen  schematic  ones  of  the 
historic correlating surroundings. This result must be taken as the admirable work of more than two 
dozens of students who participated in the degree program of Media Computer Science taught at the 
Dresden University of Applied Sciences (HTW). The scientific output on the one hand consists in the 
remarkable number of image and plan sources which were, as preparation, collected and in parts 
newly arranged, on the other hand in the elucidating new information which the virtual models can 
give about the truthfulness of an historic image source as well as in the case of a not realized draft 
about its structure, logic, correlation, quality and possibility of realization. Correlation in context with 
the latter means the interaction between such a draft and the adjacent not only historic, but also 
actual  urban  space.  As  to  say  in  terms  of  a  catch‐word:  verification  with  the  help  of  virtual 
reconstruction and building simulation. 

 

25 

Meanwhile, the fourteen virtual models are waiting in a raw state for the production of an 
adequate presentation form because, as already mentioned, in the end the visitors of the famous 
Dresden Zwinger shall be their  primary recipients.  A first attempt has already been  made when a 
video film including the time cuts 1 to 8, 12 and 13 was produced for the exhibition ‘Pöppelmann 3D 
–  Bücher,  Pläne,  Raumwelten’  presented  in  Dresden  in  the  Saxon  State  and  University  Library 
(Sächsische Landes‐ und Universitätsbibliothek – SLUB) from 16 May until 1 September 2013.14 The 
reactions  of  the  audience  were  mostly  surprised  because  of  having  seen  in  the  film  so  many 
unknown  aspects  about  such  a  familiar  building  as  the  Zwinger  is  commonly  supposed.  It  goes 
without saying that the building simulation of Pöppelmann’s stupendous unexecuted drafts created a 
great amazement. As expected, our project reveals that a looking back in history via virtual models to 
obtain results for future knowledge really works! 

 

Bibliography 
Preliminary remark: It is only given a selected bibliography concerning the architectural history of the 
Dresden Zwinger. Complementary to the topic of this article see Jahn and Welich 2009. 

Ermisch, Hubert Georg, Der Dresdner Zwinger. Mit einer Einleitung von Hubert Mohr, Schriften des 
Instituts für Theorie und Geschichte der Baukunst der Deutschen Bauakademie, 2nd edn (Dresden, 
1954). 

Franz, Heinrich Gerhard, Zacharias Longuelune und die Baukunst des 18. Jahrhunderts in Dresden, 
(Berlin, 1953). 

Franz, Heinrich Gerhard, ‘Matthäus Daniel Pöppelmann (1662–1736) und die Architektur des 
Zwingers in Dresden. Zur Genese des barocken Bauwerks’, Kunsthistorisches Jahrbuch Graz, 22 
(1986), pp. 5–77. 

Franz, Heinrich Gerhard, ‘Der Kaskadenhof – ein unbeachtetes Projekt Matthäus Daniel Pöppelmanns 
zum Dresdener Zwinger’, Dresdener Kunstblätter, 34 (1990), pp. 137–148. 

Heckmann, Hermann, M. D. Pöppelmann als Zeichner (Dresden, 1954). 

Heckmann, Hermann, Matthäus Daniel Pöppelmann. Leben und Werk (Munich and Berlin, 1972). 

Heckmann, Hermann, Matthäus Daniel Pöppelmann und die Barockbaukunst in Dresden (Berlin and 
Stuttgart, 1986). 

Hempel, Eberhard, Gaetano Chiaveri. Der Architekt der katholischen Hofkirche zu Dresden. Mit 
bautechnischen und zeichnerischen Beiträgen von Walter Krönert (Dresden, 1955). 

Hempel, Eberhard, Der Zwinger zu Dresden. Grundzüge und Schicksale seiner künstlerischen 
Gestaltung, Jahresgabe des Deutschen Vereins für Kunstwissenschaft (Berlin, 1961). 

Jahn, Peter Heinrich and Welich, Dirk, ‘Zurück in die Zukunft – Die Visualisierung planungs‐ und 
baugeschichtlicher Aspekte des Dresdner Zwingers’, Staatliche Schlösser, Burgen und Gärten Sachsen 
Jahrbuch, 16 (2009), pp. 51–72. 

 

26 

Karge, Henrik (Ed.), Gottfried Semper – Dresden und Europa. Die moderne Renaissance der Künste. 
Akten des Internationalen Kolloquiums der Technischen Universität Dresden aus Anlass des 200. 
Geburtstages von Gottfried Semper (Munich and Berlin, 2007). 

Kirsten, Michael, ‘Der Dresdener Zwinger’, Jahrbuch der Staatlichen Kunstsammlungen Dresden, 19 
(1987), pp. 53–76. 

Kuke, Hans‐Joachim, Jean de Bodt 1670–1745. Architekt und Ingenieur im Zeitalter des Barock 
(Worms 2002). 

Löffler, Fritz, Das alte Dresden. Geschichte seiner Bauten, 6th edn (Leipzig, 1981/82). 

Löffler, Fritz, Dresden im 18. Jahrhundert – Bernardo Bellotto genannt Canaletto (Würzburg 1988). 

Löffler, Fritz, Der Zwinger in Dresden. Herausgegeben von Michael Kirsten, 4th edn (Leipzig, 1992). 

Mallgrave, Harry Francis, Gottfried Semper. Ein Architekt des 19. Jahrhunderts (Zurich, 2001). 

Marx, Harald (ed.), Matthäus Daniel Pöppelmann. Der Architekt des Dresdner Zwingers, 2nd edn 
(Leipzig, 1990). 

Marx, Harald, Matthäus Daniel Pöppelmann. Der Dresdner Zwinger. Vom Festsaalbau zum Museum, 
kunststück (Frankfurt am Main, 2000). 

Nerdinger, Winfried and Oechslin, Werner (eds.), Gottfried Semper 1803 – 1879. Architektur und 
Wissenschaft (Munich, Berlin, London, New York and Zurich, 2003). 

Sponsel, Jean Louis, Der Zwinger[,] die Hoffeste und die Schloßbaupläne zu Dresden (Dresden, 1924). 

Staatliche Kunstsammlungen Dresden (ed.), Matthäus Daniel Pöppelmann 1662–1736. Ein Architekt 
des Barocks in Dresden. Ausstellung zum 250. Todestag und zum 325. Geburtstag des Erbauers des 
Dresdner Zwingers, Albertinum an der Brühlschen Terasse, 13. März 1987 bis 13. Mai 1987 (Dresden, 
1987). 

Welich, Dirk, Der Zwinger. Dresdens berühmter Festbau (Leipzig, 2002). 

 

Illustrations 
Preliminary and general remark: For all virtual models depicted in the illustrations (fig. 8, 10, 14–22, 
24, 25, 27, 29, 30, 32, 33, 36–38) and any reproductions of them the copyright is hold by Staatliche 
Schlösser, Burgen und Gärten Sachsen gGmbH, Dresden. In the following for these illustrations only 
the names of the modellers have to be named as additional information. 

Fig. 1–2, and 5 Dresden, Staatliche Schlösser, Burgen und Gärten Sachsen gGmbH. 

Fig. 3 Dresden, Sächsisches Staatsarchiv, Hauptstaatsarchiv, Rißfach 99, Nr. 14. 

Fig. 4 Dresden, Sächsische Landes‐ und Universitätsbibliothek – SLUB, Deutsche Fotothek, 

Hauptkatalog 0095526. 

27 

 

Fig. 6 Dresden, Staatsbetrieb Sächsisches Immobilien‐ und Baumanagement – SIB, IS‐Objekt‐Nr. G 
001442, Plannr. 05. 

Fig. 7 Modellers: Philipp Hackbarth (Zwinger buildings), Romy Ebert (surroundings), Rainer Uhlemann 
(adjusting of both models). 

Fig. 8 Modeller: Markus Zönnchen. 

Fig. 9 Photomontage by Peter H. Jahn of a ground plan (Dresden, Sächsisches Staatsarchiv, 
Hauptstaatsarchiv, OHMA P, Cap. I A, Nr. 26, Bl. 1–3), an elevation drawing (Dresden, Sächsische 
Landes‐ und Universitätsbibliothek – SLUB, Kartensammlung B 1978), and three printed elevations 
(Matthäus Daniel Pöppelmann, Vorstellung und Beschreibung [...] Der Königl.[ichen] Orangerie zu 
Dreßden [Dresden, 1729]). 

Fig. 10 Modellers: Philipp Hackbarth (Zwinger buildings in beige colour), Chris Leister (Zwinger 
buildings in white colour), Romy Ebert (surroundings), Rainer Uhlemann (adjusting of the models). 

Fig. 11 Photomontage by Peter H. Jahn of different image sources mostly preserved in the archives 
mentioned in endnote 4. Exceptions are no. 8, which shows a painting in possession of Staatliche 
Kunstsammlungen Dresden, Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister, and no. 13; for the latter see below fig. 31. 
Detailed information about no. 6 is given below at fig. 35 and about no. 9 at fig. 26. 

Fig. 12 Written by Peter H. Jahn. 

Fig. 13 See impressum of the webpage: 
http://www2.htw‐dresden.de/~zwinger/webs/impress.html. 

Fig. 14 Screenshot of a virtual model uploaded in the modelling software (Modeller: Anne Weinert). 

Fig. 15 Photomontage by Peter H. Jahn of a diagram (author: Loreen Pogrzeba) and a virtual model 
(modeller: Josephin Seibt). 

Fig. 16 Photomontage by Markus Wacker (modeller: Josephin Seibt). 

Fig. 17 Photomontage by Markus Wacker basing on three screenshots of a virtual model (modeller: 
Rainer Uhlemann). 

Fig. 18 Photomontage by Markus Wacker of a photograph (photographer unknown) and a rendering 
of a virtual model (modeller: Steve Kuttig). 

Fig. 19 Modellers: Philipp Hackbarth (Baroque Zwinger buildings), Michael Marschner (picture 
gallery), Steve Kuttig (texturing). 

Fig. 20 Modeller: Chris Leister. 

Fig. 21 Photomontage by Peter H. Jahn of details of fig. 34 and the model depicted in fig. 36 
(modeller: Conny Coburger). 

Fig. 22 Modeller: Anne Weinert; for the depicted source at the right half see fig. 35. 

Fig. 23 Dresden, Hochschule für Wirtschaft und Technik. 

 

28 

Fig. 24 Dresden, Hochschule für Wirtschaft und Technik (modeller: Michael Marschner). 

Fig. 25 Photomontage by Peter H. Jahn of a detail of fig. 4, an own photograph and a screenshot of a 
virtual model (modeller: Rainer Uhlemann). 

Fig. 26 Franz 1953, plates I–III, fig. 1–7. 

Fig. 27 Modeller: Rainer Uhlemann. 

Fig. 28 Photomontage by Peter H. Jahn, using details of Franz 1953, plates II and III, fig. 3, 5 and 6. 

Fig. 29 Photomontage by Peter H. Jahn, using a printed elevation (M. D. Pöppelmann, Vorstellung 
und Beschreibung [...] Der Königl.[ichen] Orangerie zu Dreßden [Dresden, 1729]), an own drawn 
pencil sketch and a rendering of a virtual model (modeller: Chris Leister). 

Fig. 30 Photomontage by Peter H. Jahn of fig. 4, a ground plan (Dresden, Sächsisches Staatsarchiv, 
Hauptstaatsarchiv, OHMA P, Cap. I A, Nr. 25a, Bl. 1–3) and a rendering of a virtual model (modeller: 
Rainer Uhlemann). 

Fig. 31 Zurich, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule (ETH), Institut für Geschichte und Theorie der 
Architektur (gta), estate of Gottfried Semper, n. 20‐052‐1/MV 52‐1‐1. 

Fig. 32 Photomontage by Peter H. Jahn of a sketched architectonic draft (Dresden, Sächsisches 
Landesamt für Denkmalpflege, Plansammlung, M 52. C. Bl. 15 / MV 89 g‐ 41‐5) and a rendering of a 
virtual model (modeller: Michael Marschner). 

Fig. 33 Photomontage by Peter H. Jahn of a photography (photographer: Uwe Miersch, Oßling) and a 
rendering of a virtual model (modeller: Michael Marschner). 

Fig. 34 Photomontage by Peter H. Jahn basing on a ground plan (Dresden, Sächsisches Staatsarchiv, 
Hauptstaatsarchiv, Ing. Corps Dresden Nr. 35e). 

Fig. 35 Dresden, Sächsisches Staatsarchiv, Hauptstaatsarchiv, Ing. Corps Dresden Nr. 35c. 

Fig. 36 Modellers: Conny Coburger and Anne Weinert. 

Fig. 37 Photomontage by Peter H. Jahn of a detail of fig. 35 and a rendering of a virtual model 
(modeller: Conny Coburger). 

Fig. 38 Modellers: Philipp Hackbarth (Zwinger courtyard), Romy Ebert (surroundings), Rainer 
Uhlemann (castle; adjusting of all models). 

                                                            
1 As authorship is divided conform to the leading responsibilities within the project, parts of the text concerning 
to  its  conception  are  written  by  Dirk  Welich,  those  to  technical  aspects  of  computer  modelling  by  Markus 
Wacker  and  those  to  preparatory  and  accompanying  architectural  historic  research  and  its  results  by  Peter 
Heinrich Jahn. The latter had done the editorial work by following Markus Wacker’s proposal for organizing the 
arguments. Thanks for partial preliminary copy‐editing to Anne Kleiner as well as to Jessica Buskirk and Bertram 
Kaschek. – Heads of the project have been Mr Welich as representative of the commissioning institution and 
Mr Wacker as that of the cooperating one. 
2 The name of the building derives from this special location: ‘Zwinger’ means the outer courtyard between a 
castle and its outer wall. 

 

29 

                                                                                                                                                                                          
3 A first attempt of such a teaching video will be mentioned at the end of this text. 
4  The  four  most  important  of  these  archives  have  been:  Sächsisches  Staatsarchiv,  Hauptstaatsarchiv  (Saxon 
Main State Archives), Sächsisches Landesamt für Denkmalpflege, Plansammlung (Plan Collection of the Saxon 
State Bureau of Monument Protection), Sächsische Landes‐ und Universitätsbibliothek – SLUB (Saxon State and 
University  Library),  and  Staatliche  Kunstsammlungen,  Kupferstichkabinett  (Graphical  Cabinet  of  the  State‐
owned  Art‐collections).  Detailed  references  to  used  sources  and  secondary  literature  for  time‐cuts  1–8  are 
already given by Jahn and Welich 2009. A continuing article concerning on time‐cuts 9–14 is still a desideratum. 
5  Matthäus  Daniel  Pöppelmann,  Vorstellung  und  Beschreibung  Des  von  S[eine]r.  Königl.[ichen]  Majestät  in 
Pohlen,  Churf[ürst]l.[ichen]  Durchl.[aucht]  zu  Sachßen/  erbauten  so  genannten  Zwinger=Gartens  Gebäuden, 
Oder Der Königl.[ichen] Orangerie zu Dreßden (Dresden: self‐published by the author, 1729). For a commented 
facsimile‐reprint reduced to small size take: Harald Keller (ed)., Matthäus Daniel Pöppelmann. Vorstellung und 
Beschreibung des Zwingergartens zu Dresden. Nachdruck des Stichwerks von 1729. Mit einem Nachwort und 
Erläuterungen, Die bibliophilen Taschenbücher n. 151 (Dortmund, 1980). 
6 For a list of all modellers see the webpage of the project: 
http://www2.htw‐dresden.de/~zwinger/webs/mitwirk.html. 
7 With the exception of some diaphanous gateway buildings like that of time‐cut no. 5 (cf. fig. 10, 29). 
8  If  the  insufficiently  documented  structure  had  been  too  complex,  the  modelling  of  a  ground  plan  was 
preferred. 
9 The protocols had been written until May 2009 by Loreen Pogrzeba, and from then on by Conny Coburger and 
Anne Weiner. 
10 This is still a serious problem in Dresden. Sources were either burnt by fire during air raids or they are missing 
as a result of evacuation paired with misplacement or even displacement. 
11 It is meant the Plan Collection of the Saxon State Bureau of Monument Protection (for the official German 
name see above note 4). The same procedure was necessary for modelling time‐cut no. 11. In this case the plan 
sources must had been taken from Sponsel 1924, plates 87–91 (cf. fig. 15). 
12 Cited above in note 5. 
13 Gottfried Semper, Das königliche Hoftheater zu Dresden (Braunschweig: Vieweg, 1849), plate I. 
14  Implemented  as  a  cooperation  between  ENBaCH  –  European  Network  for  Baroque  Cultural  Heritage, 
represented by the Institute of Romance Philology of the Technical University Dresden, Faculty of Philology and 
Cultural Humanities (Institut für Romanistik der Technischen Universität Dresden, Fakultät Sprach‐, Literatur‐ 
und Kulturwissenschaften), SLUB (as fully named above in the text) and Saxon Administration of State‐owned 
Castles and Gardens (Staatliche Schlösser, Burgen und Gärten Sachsen gGmbH). The mentioned teaching video 
was produced by Rainer Uhlemann. A work of the same is also a demo‐trailer of 2012 which was shown at 
public presentations of the ‘zwingerteam’ project, one time within the ‘Mitschnitt‐Festival’ of the HTW Dresden 
in 19 July 2012 and another time during a press conference dedicated to the project in 12 March 2013; both 
events had been held at the ‘ufa‐Palast’ cinema in Dresden. While at this time a future public presentation of 
the exhibition film is quite unclear, the demo‐trailer can be seen online: http://vimeo.com/46621228. 

 

30 


